# 1.2 Basic concepts

In this section we introduce the basic concepts related to how historical information is modeled in `timelink` .

## From Sources to Databases: the dual model

`Timelink` uses a dual model to represent historical information.
- A *text-based source-oriented data model* is used to transcribe sources with little loss of information.
- A *person-oriented model*, based on a relational database, that consolidates biographical data, handles inference of networks and reversible record linking

The ``Kleio`` notation (Manfred Thaller) is used for source-oriented data input.

A `relational database model`  is used to store person-oriented data while keeping the original source context.

A special software, *the Kleio translator* processes text transcriptions of the sources in ``kleio`` notation and generates `data`  for the the person-oriented database.

This solves the inevitable tension between a source-oriented model and an analytical model.

## The Source Oriented Model

The `source oriented model` defines a set of concepts for the transcription of information in historical sources that describe people and objects, their individual attributes and relations. It also provides the concept of `event` or `act` to represent information about something that happened in a moment in time.

The source model uses a containment structure of ``source->act->persons`` and ``objects``. The *source oriented model* uses a number of key terms in a formal way: ``source``, ``act``, ``person``, ``object``, ``function``, ``attribute`` and ``relation``.

- A historical ``source`` contains one or more ``acts``.
- An ``act`` is a record of events, as they are described in the sources (a baptism, a marriage, a sale contact, a rental contract, ...)
- An ``act`` contains actors (``persons``) and ``objects`` (things, properties, institutions, ...).
- ``persons`` and ``objects`` appear in ``acts`` with specific ``functions`` (father in a baptism, owner in a sale contract, house in a rental contract).
- ``Actors`` and ``objects`` are described by ``attributes`` (name, age, gender, price, area, ...).
- ``Actors`` and ``objects`` are linked by ``relations``. Relations are described by a type (kin, economical, professional), and a value (brother, lender, apprentice).
- Every ``act``, ``function``, ``attribute`` and ``relation`` has a date and a link to the point in the original source where it was recorded.


Example of the Kleio notation

A baptism:

```kleio
kleio$
 source$baptisms-1685
	baptism$17/9/1685/parish church
		n$manuel/m
			father$jose luis
				attr$residence/casal da corujeira
			mother$domingas jorge
			
		gfather$francisco rodrigues/id=b1685.9.17.gf
			attr$residence/moinhos do paleao
		gmother$maria pereira
			rel$kin/wife/francisco rodrigues/b1685.9.17.gf
```
  

This example shows an ``act`` (a baptism) that contains five ``persons``: child ("n"), father, mother, god father and god mother. Two of the people, the father and the god father have the ``atribute`` *residence*, and the god mother has a *kin* ``relation`` with the god father.

## The Person Oriented Model

The  `Person Oriented Model` aggregates the information collected from the sources and provides a people or object centered view where fragments of information in different sources are aggregated in biographies. 

The `Person Oriented Model` is an alternative view on the information recorded in the sources, in a way that facilitates statistical analysis, network analysis and prosopographies.

A biography is represented through 3 domains:
- Functions (the roles of the person in acts)
- Attributes
- Relations

The previous baptism generates information as follows (*italics* show information inferred by `Timelink`).

### Entities

| Id            | Class  | Inside        |
| ------------- | ------ | ------------- |
| bapt1685-1700 | source | ---           |
| *b1*          | act    | bapt1685-1700 |
| *b1-per1*     | person | *b1*          |
| b1685.9.17.gf | person | *b1*          |
| *b1-per2*     | person | *b1*          |
| *b1-per3*     | person | *b1*          |

Note that each *entity* has an unique identifier: ``id``. Such identifier is necessary to refer unambiguously to a ``person``, ``object``, ``act`` or ``source``.

Most ``ids`` are generated automatically by the *Kleio translator* when processing the source transcripts.but in some circunstances they need to be explicitly given, when a link between two entities needs to be recorded in an non ambiguous way, such asthe relation between godmother and godfather in the example above.

### Persons

| Id            | Name                | Gender |
| ------------- | ------------------- | ------ |
| *b1-per1*     | manuel              | f      |
| *b1-per2*     | jose luis           | *m*    |
| *b1-per3*     | domingas jorge      | *f*    |
| b1985.9.17.gf | francisco rodrigues | *m*    |
| *b1.per5*     | maria pereira       | *f*    |


> [!NOTE] Objects
> The `Person oriented model` also handles entities that existed and are not persons, such as physical objects, buildings, spaces (land properties), and also "abstract" or "intangible" objects such as institutions. 


**Attributes**

| Entity          | Type      | Value              | Date        |
| --------------- | --------- | ------------------ | ----------- |
| *b1-per1i*      | residence | Casal da Corujeira | *17/9/1685* |
| *b1985.9.17.gf* | residence | Moinhos do Paleao  | *17/9/1685* |

**Relations**


| Origin | Destination | Type | Value | Date |
| ------ | ----------- | ---- | ----- | ---- |
| *b1-per2* | *b1.per3* | *kin* | *husband* | *17/9/1685* |
| *b1-per5* | b1985.9.17.gf | kin | wife | *17/9/1685* |
| *b1-per2* | *b1-per1* | *kin* | *father* | *17/9/1685* |

**Functions**

Functions of people (father,mother, ...) in acts are a special case of relations linking people to acts, with the type 'function-in-act'. The same applies to objects, when they appear in acts.

| Origin        | Destination | Type            | Value   | Date        |
| ------------- | ----------- | --------------- | ------- | ----------- |
| b1985.9.17.gf | *b1*        | function-in-act | gfather | *17/9/1685* |
| *b1.per5*     | *b1*        | function-in-act | gmother | *17/9/1685* |

## How the translation between models works

`Timelink` contains a set of basic entities: *sources*, *acts*, *persons*, *objects*, *attributes* and *relations*. For an example such as the previous one to work, `Timelink` needs to know the correspondence between the `kleio` notation and the relational database tables, as well as how to infer values like gender and kin relations.
### Terminology note

When describing both the Source Oriented Model and the Person Oriented Model different terms are used to describe concepts that are similar. 

In both the Source Oriented Model (SOM) and the Person Oriented Model (POM), we have concepts for entities that existed, such as *sources*, *transcriptions of acts*, *people*, and *objects*. 

These entities have *attributes* that provide information about them, such as names, dates, and archival locations.

Additionally, both models include the concept of *relations*, which describe the connections between entities. For example, in the relations, we can specify that person X is the father of person Y or that person Z bought property W.

Each model was conceived in different contexts: the source oriented model was part of Manfred Thaller work in historical databases, while the person oriented model is based on the Entity-Relationship model that is at the base of modern relational database systems. In consequence, each model uses different terms to refer to the same things. For instance in the `Kleio`notation "groups" are used to record "entities", and "elements" to record their "attributes".


In the context of a database, entities such as *persons*, *objects*, *acts*, and *sources* are represented as rows in different database tables. Each table column corresponds to an attribute of entities of the same type, storing information such as names, dates, and other relevant data.

At a higher level, when describing the structure of information, we will use the terminology defined by the  [Entity-Relationship-Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity–relationship_model)

* **Entity**: something that existed in the real world: sources, acts, people, also "abstractions" like institutions and events like baptisms or marriages.
* **Relation**: relations between entities like kinship relations between people, ownership relations between people and properties, roles of people participating in acts.
* **Attribute**: items of information that describe entities and relations (names, dates, kinship terms, prices of transactions)
* **Entity-class or entity-type**: a category of Entities described by the same attributes `person` is a entity class, `building` is another entity class and so is `acts`; each is described by different attributes.
* **Entity instance**: a specific entity of a specific class (the person named Galileo Galillei, the building named 'Tower of Pisa', the baptism that occurred in 8/7/1685 in the church of Soure, Portugal )


We refer to the concepts above to introduce the terminology specific to the SOM and POM models.

### Concepts and terms associated with the Source model

#### Groups, elements and aspects

For the SOM the main terms are Group,Element and Aspect used by Manfred Thaller in the Kleio notation.

- Group: corresponds to *entities*.
- Element: corresponds to *attributes*.
- Aspect: represents extra information about attributes (no direct correspondence in the `entity-relatioship`. The Kleio notation allows to register not only the core value of an attribute but also a comment and the original wording in the document.

#### Groups for attributes and relations

In Timelink Kleio groups are used also to record attributes of entities that vary with time, like residence or profession.  

These attributes have not just a value ("Abbey Road", "Musician") but also have associated a date. So they have their own attributes (dates for one), like entities.

In the SOM model Kleio groups are also used to record relations. Relation groups also have their own atributes, such as origin and destination of the relation, type and value and date.

In the ER Model this type of information is called a "weak entity": they have their own attributes like entities, but they do not correspond to something that exists on its own in the real world, they depend on a main entity.


In the POM we use the terminology of databases: tables and columns.
  
- Table: corresponds to entities
- Columns: corresponds to attributes

In the Person Oriented Model tables are also used to represent relationships between entities and time varying attributes.

  

### Mapping Kleio Groups to Database tables

#### Source for person oriented generic mapping
  
The correspondence between a ER Model description and the tables and columns of a database is well defined. For a given information model described in terms of ER Model a set of tables and columns in a relational database can be produced deterministically (see the reference above for details and further references).

The correspondence between the Kleio Groups, Elements and Aspects and tables and columns in a relational database is defined by conventions and configuration files in Timelink.

Basic correspondence is provided by Timelink for basic entity types like sources, acts, people, objects. This allows Timelink to process generic Kleio transcriptions into generic tables as demonstrated in the example of the baptism above.

#### Defining mappings for specific sources

In most cases a transcription closer to the source is desired, either because of readability (we rather read baptism$ than act$ and father$ than person$) or because the source describes entities with specific attributes (for instance a land property being sold is an `object` which has special attributes such as area and a typology like rural/urban).

To be able to use Kleio to record in a format closer to the source we need to provide Timelink the following information:

- the name of the groups to be used and their relation with the core groups
- e.g. `father` and `mother` instead of `person` or `land` instead of`object`
- the extra elements, if any, that the groups will include
- if extra elements are introduced how they will be stored in database tables
- if there is information to be inferred from the transcription (attributes or relations), what are the rules to be used for inference
	- e.g. the element `sex` can be inferred if groups such as `father` and `mother` are used instead of `person`

Currently three types of configuration files are used to provide this information:

#### `str` structure or schema files for sources

- **Schema (aka structure) files** define new groups and their relation with core groups, as well as extra elements that the new groups might include.
+ **mappings files** describe how information of the new groups and elements is stored in the database tables.
+ **inference files** contain rules for inference of attributes and relations from the groups in the transcriptions.

